[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hello, and welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr.
Are you finding yourself
stuck in a rut in a job
where you're feeling
you've lost your purpose
or you've lost your passion?
Would you like to find out the
optimal pattern for your body
and for your mind otherwise
known as your purpose?
Would you like to wake up
filled with anticipation
of the adventures of the
day and grab that day?
Joining me is Jean Houston.
She's an author of 26 books, a
leader in the Human Potential
Movement.
Jean has spent nearly
50 years consulting
with heads of states, indigenous
people, US presidents, CEOs,
and luminaries respected
around the globe.
She is one of the most highly
respected teachers in the Human
Development Movement,
and she's here
to help us step outside
of that daily grind
so that we can stop
living solely for survival
and start living with passion,
with purpose, with peace.
Welcome.
Welcome to the show, Jean.
>>JEAN HOUSTON: Well,
thank you so much.
I hope I can live up
to that introduction.
>>LISA: To all that
I just said there.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: Well, I
was sharing earlier
I have so much honor and
so much respect for you,
and I am so grateful for you
being here because of who
you are and who you represent
to so many of us as a model.
So I appreciate you being there.
And you talk about big topics
like the Human Potential
Movement-- the possible human.
What do you mean by
the possible human?
>>HOUSTON: Well, the
possible human, Lisa,
is a beingness that resides
in every human being
beneath the surface
crust of consciousness.
We are so much more
than we pretend to be.
>>LISA: Wait, how
do you know that?
>>HOUSTON: We are so much
more than what eyes can see.
Because I've had
thousands of research
subjects-- perhaps several
million seminar participants.
And I am often, because of the
nature of my life and work,
I am thrown into situations of
often very difficult challenges
where one really has to
evoke, call forth, ignite
the human passion, the human
possibility, the human capacity
in order to deal with the
complexity of our time.
Because let's face
it, we are living
in what is the most interesting,
challenging, awesome time
in human history.
>>LISA: You've called it
the most critical time.
Why?
>>HOUSTON: It is that, too.
I mean, other times in
history thought they were it.
They're wrong.
This is it.
>>LISA: Why?
Why is this--
>>HOUSTON: Well, look what
could happen in our lifetime.
I mean, we see what is
happening with the ecology
and the global
warming, and the fact
that within a pretty
short period of time
it is quite possible
that 40% of the cities--
well, 40% of the major cities
of the world are on coastlines.
Those oceans rise
from global warming.
You can see what's
happening-- huge migrations.
We see what is
happening not just
with the climate on
many other levels
but the inner climate
where most of us
were prepared for a
very different world.
The world that I grew up in was
a very, very, very different
world from the world
I live in today.
>>LISA: In what way?
In what way?
>>HOUSTON: Well, in fact
that we had certain jobs.
We knew that we would have the
jobs for the rest of our life,
and that we would get a
pension, and, and, and.
And there was a kind of--
kind of natural grace
of expectation, and all
of that is gone now.
>>LISA: There was certainty.
>>HOUSTON: There was certainty.
>>LISA: That is something
we are lacking, yes.
>>HOUSTON: We knew who
we were in community.
We knew who we were.
The old story worked.
Now, we are not quite sure.
We're in tremendous transition.
>>LISA: Did we really, though?
Did we really know who we were?
>>HOUSTON: Well,
we knew who we were
within the context of the time.
And now the context has changed.
I mean, there has been
probably more changes
from the time of, say, the
birth of Christ to about 1950 as
between 1950 and today.
And that's the level of change.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
>>HOUSTON: We've not
been prepared for it.
But the fact is that the
human capacity is so vast,
and it takes this kind of
incredible acceleration
of events and of time and space.
Space is shrinking,
time is warping,
and we are being called to tap
into these immense resources
which we did not need
during the millennium.
The millennium-- the
thousands of years
in which we led what we
might call the expected life.
>>LISA: That's a great term.
You're so great with terms.
Take us back to your childhood
where you met your mentor.
As you are a mentor
to so many now,
you had someone who
ignited you who turned--
>>HOUSTON: Well, I had several.
Who's the one
you're thinking of?
>>LISA: de Chardin.
>>HOUSTON: Oh, right.
You want the whole story?
>>LISA: I do.
>>HOUSTON: It's a dilly.
>>LISA: Tell me.
Tell me, yes.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
So I'm 14 years old.
I'm this great big
overgrown girl.
And I have just found
out that my parents
are getting divorced.
Whoa-- I was sunk into grief,
and I couldn't get out of it.
I mean, I had had a wonderful
time with my parents.
I went to 20 schools
before I was 12.
My father was a comedy writer
and wrote the comedy shows,
so we were always on the road
and we had marvelous times.
So I was so stunned
and in such grief.
And some kid in my
school said, hey,
I hear that if you run you
can run away from your grief.
I said, what a good idea.
[LAUGHTER]
>>HOUSTON: I
wouldn't do that now.
>>LISA: Wise advice.
>>HOUSTON: Wise kid.
So I ran down Park Avenue.
Run, run, run.
I was running late for school.
And I ran into an old man.
And I knocked the
wind out of him.
And I picked him
up off the ground,
and he was laughing
and laughing.
And he said, where
are you going?
And I said, well, I'm--
I'm going to school.
I'm going-- he said,
but you-- you know.
He was clearly in a
life of great adventure.
I said, you really think so?
Oh yes, he said.
Well, bon voyage.
I said, bon voyage.
And I ran off to school.
Following week, I meet
the old man again.
And this time I
have my dog, who's
a Fox Terrier named Champ.
He said, ah, my
friend, the runner,
and you have a Fox Terrier.
I knew one many
years ago in France.
And he said, where
are you going now?
I said, well, I'm-- I'm, I'm
going to Central Park with
my dog to think about things.
Oh, I will go with you sometime.
OK?
OK.
I will take my constitutional,
he said in his French accent.
And he had a long
name-- French name--
but he asked me to call him
by the first part of it, which
to my American ears
sounded like "Mr. Tay-er."
>>LISA: "Tay-er?"
>>HOUSTON: "Mr. Tay-er."
And Mr. Tayer and I began
to have these meetings that
lasted off and on for the next--
actually, when I really came
down, nearly three years.
>>LISA: As a teenager.
>>HOUSTON: As a teenager.
I was 14 when it started.
So we would take these
walks, and he was something.
Lisa, he had no self
consciousness at all.
He would suddenly fall
to his knees on the grass
and say, oh look, a caterpillar.
Ummm.
Little tiny feet.
Little, little,
beautiful, little spots.
Ah, hey, Jean, can you feel
yourself to be a caterpillar?
And I thought, very
easily, Mr. Tayer.
Here I was, 14
years old, 5' 11",
probably had some
red dots on my face.
I felt like a caterpillar.
He said, what are
you when you finally
become un papillon, a butterfly?
Oh, I don't know Mr.--
Yes, you don't-- no.
No, you do know.
What is the butterfly of Jean?
Oh, well, I think when I become
a papillon-- a butterfly--
I'll, I'll, I'll fly all over
the earth and help people.
Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom.
Oh, Jean, sniff the wind.
Same wind was sniffed
by Jesus Christ.
I said, Jesus Christ
sniffed this wind?
I better hold my breath.
And then he went, Alexandre
le Grand, Jeanne d'Arc,
Marie Antoinette-
there were a lot
of French people in
the wind, I noticed.
Genghis Khan, not so good.
Be filled with the
tides of history.
Be filled with Joan of Arc.
I mean, it was incredible.
Jean, Jean, look-- God's
calligraphy in the sky.
You know, in the clouds.
And everything was filled
with magic and wonder.
And he would talk to things.
He would talk to the
stones in Central Park.
Oh, my friend, the mica
schist layer, do you remember?
So we had these-- this
tremendous time and--
>>LISA: And as a teenager who
was going through a dark time--
>>HOUSTON: Well, I wasn't
going through-- yeah,
I was going through
that dark time.
But he lifted-- he gave me
books to read, to think about.
Alfred North Whitehead's
"Adventures and Ideas."
Lecomte du Nuoy's
"Human Destiny."
And one day I said to him,
Um, Mr. Tayer, you know,
at school we talk about the
H-bomb and whether we're-- I
don't know I'm ever
going to get to be 21.
You know, you talk about
destiny all the time.
Oh, Jean, yes, we
are with the destiny.
It is as if we are moving
towards a noosphere--
the field of mind when we
will be interconnected.
And the world mind will be
taking a walk with itself,
and it is then that we will
get into the higher destiny
that the God has
prepared for us.
I mean, we had these
tremendous conversations.
>>LISA: Did you ever go
back to your peers and say,
the noosphere, the noosphere.
There's this man--
>>HOUSTON: I did.
The noo-as-what did
you say, Jeannie?
>>HOUSTON: Anyway, we had
this-- he really-- you know,
he saw me, but he also embedded
me in the cosmic story.
We went to-- and
this is something
I've never written about-- we
went to the 64th Street Central
Park.
And we started
looking at-- what was
it-- some kind of little
bloop, bloop, bloop.
>>LISA: Bubbles?
>>HOUSTON: A kind of bubble
type of fishy type of thing.
And then we went on to fish.
And then he took me to the
fish and the aquariums.
And then we looked at bugs.
And then we looked--
we went all way up,
and you know, primitive
beings, and then
the monkeys and
the higher monkeys,
and then the human beings.
And then we ended
looking at a baby.
He said, that is the
tomorrow's child.
That is the future of evolution.
It was that kind of learning
that meant so much--
>>LISA: Oh, you can't
get that at school.
>>HOUSTON: --so much to me.
And it turned me on.
Then it was my first
year in college.
I was at Barnard College.
It was April 7.
>>LISA: Wow.
What a memory.
>>HOUSTON: And I was
talking with him,
and he seemed very wan and pale.
And he talked-- and
I gave him the-- it
was the shell of a snail.
He said, oh, escargot.
And he began to talk about
the great spirals of creation
that's in the brain and
in the intestinal tract--
>>LISA: And he
relates it to the--
>>HOUSTON: --and in the
galaxies and the whorl pattern
of flowers.
And he said, it is all a
great spiral of becoming.
And he went-- he waxed
ecstatic for probably
the better part of 20 minutes.
Until finally he said,
omega, omega, omega.
The deep things that
are calling forth
are unfolding of
our possibilities
and of all of
reality into spirit.
And it was he who
we believe said it,
we are not just human beings
having a spiritual experience;
we are spiritual beings
having a human experience.
So I said-- he said,
au revoir, Jean.
I said, au revoir, Mr. Tayer.
I'll see you on Tuesday.
We often met Tuesdays and
Thursdays when he was around.
And Champ, my dog,
did not want to go.
And Champ went, [WHIMPERING].
Come on, Champ.
Come on. [WHIMPERING].
Please, Champ.
Come on.
And Champ just dragged,
but finally went along.
Next Tuesday, I was waiting in
the same place we always met.
Because he lived,
actually, catacorner to me.
Not at that time, but most
of that period of time.
He lived at 83rd,
84th and Park Avenue.
I lived at 86th
off of Park Avenue.
And we waited and waited,
and he didn't come.
And the following
Thursday, I waited.
And Tuesday, Thursday--
to eight weeks I waited.
He never came.
He had died that Easter
Sunday, April 10th,
and I did not know it.
Years later I was
in graduate school,
and someone gave me a
book without a cover
called, "The Phenomenon of Man."
And I read it.
And it was too familiar--
noosphere, metamorphosis--
and I said to my friend, do you
have-- do you have the cover?
And she pulled it out
from underneath a big pile
of The New York Times.
And I flipped it over, and there
was no forgetting that face.
Mr. Tayer had been Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin--
the great, great--
>>LISA: Philosopher.
>>HOUSTON: --mystic,
philosopher, paleontologist.
One of the great luminous
minds of the 20th century.
>>LISA: And you never
knew at the time.
You never--
>>HOUSTON: And a lot of people
did not know at the time.
It was only after he died
that a Mademoiselle Jeanne
Mortier, who had the
rights to his work,
published his great works.
>>LISA: So you were
able to connect to that.
So how did you take
that experience
and then go on to
become a teacher?
Did you feel that that
was an experience that
happened to you for a reason?
>>HOUSTON: What a
wonderful question.
I'm sure it did.
I went on within-- by
the time I was 20, 21,
I was teaching at Columbia.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOUSTON: But the point,
I guess, I was 21-- 21,
22-- yeah, about that, and I
remember the way he taught me.
It was all experiential.
I mean, I remember watching-- we
were watching a very old woman
watch a little boy play a game.
And he went up to
her-- Madame, why
you seem so fascinated
by the game?
Yes, well, it's because I played
a game like that in Central
Park in 1885, but it's
a might different.
And he goes to the
little boy, would you
like to see how it was
played so many years ago?
Yeah, sure.
And this is Central
Park, New York City.
And he would just
put people together.
And so this has been part
of my life-- experience,
experiential, really making--
having deep and complex
and evocative concepts--
>>LISA: Conversations, yes.
>>HOUSTON: --and then
making them hands-on,
sensory-rich, letting
people feel them,
experience them, incarnate
them, become them.
>>LISA: And that is what
I was saying earlier.
That is why I so appreciate
your embodiment of all of this.
Now to hear your stories and
how you started off with this.
Did you ever have a goal to
say I want to be a teacher,
I want to be a business
owner or whatnot,
or have you always lived your
life in this full richness
and what has come out of it?
>>LISA: I had a sense when
I was very, very young--
so young, maybe two,
three years old--
that there was lots to do here.
>>LISA: You did.
You did.
>>HOUSTON: I had a big job.
Yeah, I had that
from the very start.
And also, then,
getting the experience
before I was 11, 12
years old of being
able to travel through
America at a time
that if you went to school
in Biloxi, Mississippi one
day and Bemidji,
Minnesota two days later,
you were in totally
different realities.
>>LISA: Different lands.
>>HOUSTON: Actually,
as radical as being
in an island off of Greece
and then being in Norway.
I think that's how
different it was.
>>LISA: So your-- by
the way, your travels
took you to vast places
where you started
to get into the
roots of the people
and really help the
people where you would go.
And then you found yourself
conversing with heads of state.
>>HOUSTON: Well, you jumped
about 30 years, but yes.
>>LISA: Yes, I
know, but you went
from these-- so what took
you on your initial travels
to outside of the country?
>>HOUSTON: What took me?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOUSTON: Well, initially,
I wanted to see the world,
you know.
That was it.
But then Margaret Mead became--
the great anthropologist--
became a very,
very close friend.
In fact, I became
her second daughter--
the adopted daughter-- and she
lived with my husband and I
off and on for the last
six years of her life.
And she said, Jean, I want you
to harvest the human potential.
You've been doing it
in the laboratory,
and now I want you to
do it around the world.
Go around these-- I'm
going to write you letters
of introduction to people who
will be important to help you
introduce you into
their cultures.
Find out.
Find out why this
tribe in Africa-
this particular tribe in West
Africa, it was towards West--
has no history of warfare
as we understand it
and no neurosis as
we understand it.
So she sent me off there, and
I lived with them for a while.
And, indeed, I found out they
thought in very different ways.
>>LISA: In what ways?
>>HOUSTON: Well,
for example, there
was a problem around sanitation.
They all got together
with the drums-- music--
and they danced it with
that great chicken dance.
And they drummed it.
I mean, from little tiny
children to the elders,
and they danced it.
And then they sang it.
And that wonderful
back and forth.
[SINGING]
>>HOUSTON: And the
drumming and the dancing,
and they were all
incarnating the problem.
And they drew it, and they
talked a little bit about it.
And they danced it some more.
And then they had a
tremendous solution.
What were they doing?
They were cooking
on more burners.
They were using
more of themselves.
Do you see?
And so that gave me a huge
revelation that we cannot live
as encapsulated bags of skin
dragging around our dreary,
little egos.
We literally have to use so
much more of this immensity
that we have been given.
>>LISA: And then you weave
that into teaching people--
>>HOUSTON: Teaching people
how to do these things, yes.
>>LISA: --how to do--
>>HOUSTON: She sent me to
Bali to finish up-- well,
I don't know if I
was finishing up
her work-- but in the
villages in which she worked
and taking pictures
of the people
that she had known as babies
who were now in their 30s
or whatever, 40s, I guess.
And she said, Jean, find out
why so many of them are artists.
75% are artists.
They might also be textile
designers or cooks,
but they are also artists--
>>LISA: In Bali.
>>HOUSTON: --or rice farmers.
And I watched this culture.
And I watched the way they would
learn things very differently
from the way we learned.
They would pass into a
kind of liminal state--
an in-between state, somewhat
like a trance state--
but speaking very conscious.
And then the great master of the
carving would take their hands,
and they would carve
at the same time
that they heard beautifully the
wonderful Balinese, interesting
music.
>>LISA: Music, yes.
>>HOUSTON: And then I brought
a lot of my students over,
and every one of us produced
a blooming masterpiece
as far as I'm concerned.
Because we were being trained
in their way of shifting
consciousness, of getting-- of
becoming the very thing that we
were painting or
carving or dancing.
>>LISA: Do you think
that we, as a society,
now have gotten so
far away from that?
We've gotten so heady about
the five steps, the ten steps
to this and that, and
we've lost touch with--
>>HOUSTON: I'm laughing because
various publishers have been
saying, now why don't you
write a book as the five steps
and I keep refusing.
I don't want to do that.
>>LISA: I see them come across
my desk all the time, yes.
Yes.
I mean, how linear
have we gotten
in our thinking I should ask?
>>HOUSTON: Well, you
know, wait a minute.
I went to school at a
time that art was still
important in the
classroom-- art and music.
So we drew and we
painted and we danced.
>>LISA: And that's
how you learned.
>>HOUSTON: And this
is the way we learned.
>>LISA: Of course.
Of course.
>>HOUSTON: It was
starting probably
in the late '60s, et
cetera, that all of this
was taken away for--
though they kept sports.
They did keep sports, but
they took out music and art.
When you take out music and
art, you hurt a child's brain.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>HOUSTON: I go into
schools around the world,
and one of the things
is I do is restore
the culture in the school.
Get rid of the lousy, British,
Missionary education which
the Brits themselves
abandoned a long time.
Put art and music
back into the culture
of the schools of Bangladesh.
Put the drumming.
Put the weaving.
Because if children are
dancing and singing and arting
and incarnating information,
they do not forget.
But if it's this kind of
thing with abstraction
now you have all these
fractions by tomorrow,
you're not going to learn it.
We are as different from
each other as snowflakes.
We are not flaky; we are
snowflakey in our variation.
But art and music, and
dancing, and drumming,
and all of these things activate
different learning capacities
and latencies.
And that's why I
say, do you know,
Lisa I have never
seen a stupid child.
I have seen incredibly
stupid systems of education
that reduce,
diminish, and demean.
>>LISA: That part
of the brain that
does develop the music is the
same part of the brain that
develops the math and
that way of thinking.
>>HOUSTON: The
mathematics, very much so.
>>LISA: So why is
that now considered
an extracurricular activity?
And that's what I'm asking you.
I mean, that is-- we've
gotten so far away from--
>>HOUSTON: There's many
political reasons for that.
Part of it is finance, you know.
And part of it is there's just
so many more things to learn.
And so they put that in.
And, of course,
many machines have
replaced things-- the computers.
>>LISA: True.
>>HOUSTON: All these kids with
their transcendental thumbs
trying to connect with each
other on their mobile phones.
>>LISA: Yes, exactly.
To where we are now.
>>HOUSTON: But there's an
immensity of information,
most of which they
will not learn.
But it's deeply unfortunate,
and I've written extensively
about this in my
book, "Jump Time."
>>LISA: Yes, and I want
to talk to you about that.
>>HOUSTON: And also in my
book-- my really good book--
which is my autobiography
that talks about this,
"A Mythic Life."
>>LISA: "A Mythic Life."
They're all really good books,
but that one was wonderful.
I want to ask you about--
you touched on politics
for a second there,
and you have--
I have to ask you about--
>>HOUSTON: [GROANING].
>>LISA: I have to
because you have spoken
and you have spent time
with these political leaders
and the US presidents.
What is missing, Jean?
What is it that's missing
that's led us to this state
that we're in now?
>>HOUSTON: I think it is the
sense of deep human community.
>>LISA: Really?
>>HOUSTON: Yeah.
And the abstraction
from so many things.
Do you know that when people
were involved with wind,
weather, and trees, and they did
whole processes from beginning
to middle to the end,
they understood process.
Now you throw a switch,
whoop, you got the beginning,
you got the end, you have
no idea of the middle.
And the middleman, whether
it's political or in business,
takes over.
And so you are the recipient
of the end process,
and you have lost
the process itself.
Which is, by the way,
why it is critical
that women come into the
political arena, the business
arena, because women
understand process.
They have to.
You bring children up.
>>LISA: Yes, you nurture.
You have gestation, yes.
>>HOUSTON: Process.
Understand process.
Making things cohere,
develop, grow.
The subjective, inner world
being as important to many
as the outer one.
And I really believe that the
single most important thing
that has happened
the last 5,000 years
is women-- slowly but surely
in the last 50 to 100 years--
joining men as equals or as
partners in the whole domain
of the human agenda.
Without that we are not going to
survive, and everybody agrees.
>>LISA: Everybody does agree.
But in a way that there was
a bit of a backlash where
women became men in order to--
>>HOUSTON: Second-rate men.
>>LISA: Yes, in order
to match that energy.
And now the rise of
the-- we're able to now
have a feminine power in
a political environment.
>>HOUSTON: But I would say--
>>LISA: Almost.
Almost.
>>HOUSTON: Almost.
Well there's still
a lot of issues.
But I really believe
that as women
rise you're not going to see the
same kind of political problems
at the same level.
You always have
political problems,
but you really need a
much more of a balance.
In the countries where
that work-- let's
say the Scandinavian
countries, the Netherlands--
it's pretty balanced
between women and men.
>>LISA: And the health
care systems are balanced.
>>HOUSTON: Health care systems.
Everything's balanced.
>>HOUSTON: Education
is balanced.
>>LISA: Food systems, yes.
If we could get to that place.
Do you think that we're
moving too fast as a society?
And I want to get into the
teachings of "Jump Time,"
but I just have you
here and I would
love to ask you is
the age of technology
that we're living
in right now causing
us to disconnect
so much from that?
Is it going to end in a place
that you see as catastrophic?
I mean, there's so much energy
around the 2012 concept,
and it's really more
of a bigger story.
>>HOUSTON: Oh, it's a very
huge story that we're in.
We're in the acceleration
of time and history.
I mean, it just is
what's going on.
>>LISA: You sent chills through
my spine when you said that,
yes.
>>HOUSTON: And, also
at the same time,
too many people live behind
screens-- television screens,
iPods, iPads, you know,
iPhones, what have you.
And instead of living
their own life,
they're living second
and third removal lives.
We need many more teaching
learning communities.
One of the things that
Margaret Mead said to me
on her deathbed,
she said, you know
I'm lying here being an
anthropologist on my own dying.
Fascinating experience.
There's no hierarchy to it.
And from what I'm
seeing, I want you
to forget everything
I've been teaching you
about working with
governments and bureaucracies.
She'd been teaching me for six
years-- now you tell me this?
Now?
She's got like a
day to live here.
Yes, she says.
I see if we're going to
grow and green our time,
it's a question of
people getting together
in teaching learning
communities- no guru.
Guru is spelled
"gee, you are you."
>>LISA: That's great.
[LAUGHTER]
>>HOUSTON: Very little money
if you can get away with it.
Lots of good food, music.
But really, she said, doing
deep growing together-- growing
in body and mind and spirit--
using your kinds of exercises,
Jean, other people's
exercises, whatever it is,
but really getting
together in these teaching
learning communities
and growing together.
They are not
psycho-therapeutic communities.
That's for other
kinds of communities.
They are mutual growth.
And you have to
watch out if you have
a psychologist in the
middle because they'll
want to lead it.
No.
It's got to be people--
shared guidance.
But as you grow
and as you expand
these capacities-- something
that I've devoted my life to,
you know-- then
you will know what
needs to be done
in the community.
And you will be able to go
into the communities and say,
we have to have a
light here where
people have been
getting killed, we've
got to have a center
for battered women
where they really get to
recover their self esteem
and what they can really
do, and valuable employment
in the world, we
have to do this.
And this is what we've done.
And she said, when the time
is right, you go out there
and you make it happen.
I said, yes ma'am, I will,
and in my own way I've tried.
>>LISA: And that is what you do.
>>HOUSTON: Among other things.
>>LISA: So let's
talk about that.
How do you explore
in individuals--
in bringing this to a practical
level of this conversation--
exercises that you teach?
What is jump time?
What is that?
>>HOUSTON: Well, it's the
acceleration of everything.
First of all, what is jump time?
Jump time is a time of what is
called punctuated equilibrium.
Now what do I mean by that?
When you look at a fossil
record of any species--
any species that existed
hundreds of thousands of years
ago or a million
years ago-- you see
in the fossil record
over the years
it looks pretty much the same.
And then suddenly,
whoop, very quickly
it has developed all kinds
of new appendages, qualities,
beings.
>>LISA: Evolved.
>>HOUSTON: Evolved, but it
evolves in jumps for the--
>>LISA: Innate.
>>HOUSTON: --most part.
It doesn't evolve
la, la, la, la.
>>LISA: Slowly.
It's a quantum leap evolvement.
>>HOUSTON: Well, it's a leap.
And sometimes it's
an exponential leap.
So maybe things get
too hot, and they've
got things you've got to grow
very fast however it happens.
>>LISA: So give me some
examples of what that would be.
>>HOUSTON: Well, in
terms of-- let's take--
let's not talk about
the animal world,
but let's talk about
the human world.
In the human world,
you find-- and I
do a little shtick
on this, too--
that the jumps in culture will
often-- or of our human growth
will often happen
very, very quickly.
And we are in a jump time now.
If you want me to do
something about that, I can.
>>LISA: I absolutely do.
We're going to do
jump-- Jean has
an amazing poem that you wrote.
I call it a poem,
but it's a movement.
It's an inspiration.
We're going to go through
that in just a second
because it gets
us up on our feet
and get us moving to a
place of-- but I want
to talk a little
bit more about it.
>>HOUSTON: But
that's what I mean--
the equilibrium of things
of being same old, same old,
it shifts.
And that's where
it's punctuated,
and then you move
to the next stage.
And we are in one of the
singularities of history
of the all time jumps
that is happening now.
>>LISA: What defines
that specifically?
I've heard it spoken
about but in vague terms.
What specifically defines this
time, right now, as jump time?
>>HOUSTON: We just spoke
about one of them--
the rise of women to full
partnership with men.
That's a massive change.
>>LISA: That is true.
>>HOUSTON: The new technologies.
The world mind taking
a walk with itself.
The very fact that we are--
we cannot be separated the way
that we have been in the past.
>>LISA: The world mind is
taking a walk with itself.
>>HOUSTON: That's a
very, very large one.
The fact that we
are interconnected
with almost everybody.
I've forgotten how many
people have computers,
but it's in the billions.
It's in the billions.
How many people on
the mobile phone?
Billions.
I have been in
situations where I've
been in a jungle
setting in the Orinoco
and seeing a naked Indian
coming out with a smartphone.
>>LISA: Oh, no way.
>>HOUSTON: Yeah, you-- you--
>>LISA: Oh my God.
>>HOUSTON: You know,
very few people
are innocent of
other people anymore.
And this was not
true when I first
began traveling as
long ago as 1958.
It has shifted radically.
And with it, the level
of fear of the other
has also risen exponentially.
>>LISA: That comes with it.
>>HOUSTON: The fear
between the religions.
The fear between--
>>LISA: Because we
know so much more now?
Or because it's
much more available?
>>HOUSTON: No, it's because
suddenly-- because we
are so interconnected, we are
not cut off from the realities.
Before, you lived
under the baron.
You plowed his land.
You were the serf.
You're not that anymore.
Look at the Occupy Movements
that spread all over, which
are going to become--
which are going
to multiply in many new ways.
>>LISA: As we've seen.
>>HOUSTON: And the
so-called 1% versus
the fact when 1% owns so much
of the world economic system.
You know and--
>>LISA: And the media and--
>>HOUSTON: --you see how many
people live under $1 a day.
And I've been in
places where they
live under much, much less.
And we're talking
in the billions.
This is very bad ecology.
>>LISA: It's out of balance.
>>HOUSTON: It's out of
balance, and we have access
to the knowledge
of that, you see.
And things have to happen.
>>LISA: And your term of that
knowledge is inspiring people
to be who their full
potential is no matter what
their environment, no matter
what the situation that they
have--
>>HOUSTON: Well, to a
much larger potential.
Full?
We don't even know what
the full potential is,
but certainly a larger use
of the self and a larger
use-- a larger community
co-creativeness that can really
turn the tides of
life and history.
I think we're moving--
I mean, I don't know.
I would've said
that we're moving
toward a kind of
planetary civilization--
not a world civilization but
a planetary civilization.
We have a high emphasis on
culture-- cultures themselves
becoming more, not less,
within the next 50 years.
Government as we understand it
now will be very, very changed.
Because people have direct
access to a democratic process
which they lost for
many, many years--
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>HOUSTON: --while
we were so separated.
>>LISA: So the power goes back
into the hands of the people?
>>HOUSTON: Pretty
much so, I think.
>>LISA: All right.
So if you can do with me,
you have an exercise that I--
>>HOUSTON: Many exercises.
>>LISA: I know you do.
>>HOUSTON: Thousands of them.
>>LISA: You're an--
>>HOUSTON: 130,000 pages
of them, actually,--
>>LISA: A hundred--
>>HOUSTON: --of lectures
and exercises unpublished.
>>LISA: Wow.
So can you share one--
>>HOUSTON: 130,000 pages?
>>LISA: No.
How much time do we have?
Share one of them with
us so that people at home
can take this to
a practical level.
>>HOUSTON: All right.
I've done a lot of
studies in creativity.
And I once made a
study of 55 of some
of the most creative-- I mean
sustained creative people
in North America.
Among my research subjects was
Margaret Mead, Joseph Campbell,
Buckminster Fuller,
Jonas Salk, and then
a lot of people whose names
you would not necessarily
know that had high
sustained creativity.
Well, they were very different
from each other-- very
different.
However, there were
things that were
subconstant in all of them.
>>LISA: What?
What was the same?
>>HOUSTON: They were
fascinated by the workings
of their own mind.
They were archaeologists
They were spelunkers in the
caves of their creativity.
And they took their
own mind seriously.
And they delved into
them-- not just in thinking
but in sensory.
They were all high sensates
in one way or another.
They might be lacking
one major sense,
but they would
have it in spades.
Joseph Campbell was
not an imagizer.
But he comes out and
writes all these books
on images and symbols and myths
because he was an athlete.
He was a high kinesthetic.
He felt them.
That's why he writes a
book called "The Hero's
Journey," not "The
Hero's Symbol."
Margaret Mead had all
the senses, you see.
And so what I would do--
>>LISA: So she lived
to her fullest--
>>HOUSTON: Full,
full sensory life.
Rich, rich, rich.
And full memory.
She had the greatest
memory I've ever seen.
>>LISA: Did she?
>>HOUSTON: And she could also
remember six, seven, eight
dreams of a night because her
inner senses were so acute.
Now when I studied how these
people thought and then began
to abstract from this
and create exercises,
one of the first things that you
have to do not only to activate
the intui-- what are called
the inner propioceptives--
the inner images-- how
many people out there,
for example, think in pictures?
You can close your eyes.
You see pictures.
Some people think in words.
I'm a word person.
Some are kinesthetic--
you think in movement.
We have some great
tasters there.
People like Julia Child
was a phenomenal taster.
She could taste
something and then
she could be back there when it
was first-- she first tasted it
60 years before.
Then you have snifters.
All of us are combinations,
but most of us
have one or two dominants.
Like mine is audio
and kinesthetic.
>>LISA: So you can hear
it and then feel it?
>>HOUSTON: Whereas
my late husband
was a phenomenal visualizer.
If he was here-- if
he could come back
from wherever he is now and I
would say, Bob, tell the folks,
close your eyes, tell
them what you see.
He'd say, well, here
I am in ancient Egypt
and they are building the
pyramid to me, the pharaoh.
He was always the pharaoh.
He was never the serf, you know.
And the great bird,
the great Horus falcon,
comes and plucks
me up and takes me
to the top of the
pyramid where I
see the great Sekhmet, the
lion-headed goddess, who
opens her golden
jaws and swallows me.
And I am now in a land
of emerald green Buddhas.
Now, this will go on and on and
and on and on and on and on.
Me-- I close my
eyes, and if I cheat
I see the tiles on
the bathroom floor.
I'm a little better than that
now because I worked at it.
But I am auditory
and kinesthetic.
What are you?
>>LISA: I am auditory.
>>HOUSTON: You're auditory?
>>LISA: Well, actually,
I actually-- more visual.
I can do that.
I can see into lifetimes
and lifetimes and lifetimes
and lifetimes.
>>HOUSTON: Can you really?
Oh my.
>>LISA: I do.
I--
>>HOUSTON: That's
wonderful, to be visual.
But I'm not visual at all.
I mean, just tiny bit.
But boy, do I hear things.
>>LISA: You do.
I heard.
You've repeated
phrases and sentences
that you-- dates that you
specifically remember.
>>HOUSTON: Because I
remember them as sounds.
Now, for example, we can
use, we can activate,
these interior senses
so that we begin
to really regrow those
parts of our brain.
And I'll do it with
everybody, but I'm
going to use you as the example.
May I?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: So first we're
going to go through the senses.
But first, I'm going to use
it-- I'll do a doubled exercise.
I'd like to show people the art
and science of manifestation
by the activation
of interior images.
>>LISA: Beautiful.
>>HOUSTON: OK?
>>LISA: And this would
transition anyone
from wherever you are to the
place that you want to be?
>>HOUSTON: Exactly.
>>LISA: OK, great.
>>HOUSTON: Now what
I'd like you to do
is think about something
that you'd really
like to accomplish pretty soon--
the next few weeks, few months.
Think of something
you'd like to do.
And everybody else,
you think of something
you'd like to accomplish.
>>LISA: Hmmm.
I would like to have quality
time with my family-- not
rushed time.
Quality.
>>HOUSTON: You have
what a nine-year-old?
>>LISA: I have a nine-year-old
and an incredible husband.
And I want to have
them feel like they
are fully present with me.
Yes.
As a busy mom, I
tend to plan so much.
And I get lost in that.
And I don't spend enough quality
time with the relationships.
That's the one thing
that I want the most.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
>>LISA: It really is.
>>HOUSTON: Within the
next three or four months?
>>LISA: Yes.
Absolutely.
>>HOUSTON: You're
holding a script.
Put it down.
>>LISA: Put it down, yes.
>>HOUSTON: No, we
don't need that.
>>LISA: No.
>>HOUSTON: I'm going to take
you through a series of images.
Now generally we would be
challenging each other,
but we don't have
the time for that.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Lisa, I would like
you-- I would like
you to see the sun rise
behind your closed eyes.
>>LISA: I remember
a specific one.
Mm hm.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
I'd like to see-- I'd like
you to see the sun set.
>>LISA: Umm.
I remember that better.
>>HOUSTON: I'd like you to see
an ocean crashing on the shore.
>>LISA: Um-hmm.
>>HOUSTON: Great waves.
>>HOUSTON: I would like you
to see a house being built.
>>LISA: I see that, yes.
>>HOUSTON: I would
like you to see a race.
People racing.
Maybe an Olympic race.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>HOUSTON: I would like you--
>>HOUSTON: --to see what
it is that you talked
about-- the quality of
attention and empathy
between you and your family.
I'd like you to
see it happening.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
You see, now I've just
run you through images
and then we ended up
with the image of that.
Now I would like you--
>>LISA: I see.
>>HOUSTON: --to
touch a baby's skin.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>HOUSTON: I would like
you to climb a tree.
>>LISA: [EXHALING]
>>HOUSTON: OK?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: I would
like you to plunge
your hands into
warm, sloppy mud.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOUSTON: OK?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: I'd like you to play
patty-cake with a little child.
>>LISA: Mmm.
>>HOUSTON: OK?
>>LISA: I do it often, yes.
>>HOUSTON: You do that?
>>LISA: I do that.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
I'd like you to give your
husband's head a good head rub.
>>LISA: He loves
a good back rub.
>>HOUSTON: All right,
then, back rub.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: OK?
>>HOUSTON: You got that?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: I would
like you to touch
the long, bony, soft
nose of a horse.
>>LISA: Aww, I did
that the other day.
>>HOUSTON: I'd like you to walk
through a vat of warm honey
up to your neck.
>>LISA: Oh, fun.
>>HOUSTON: OK?
>>LISA: That's not
something I've done.
>>HOUSTON: Now under an icy
cold shower to get rid of that.
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOUSTON: All right.
All right, now I would like you
to touch, to feel and touch--
and don't worry about
the logic of it--
but touch what it
is that you want
to accomplish with
your family in a fairly
short period of time.
>>LISA: I get this
beautiful image of the three
of us touching the sky.
I don't know why-- just
like grabbing a cloud.
>>HOUSTON: Ah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>HOUSTON: I'd like you
to smell a rose garden.
>>LISA: Mmm, my favorite.
>>HOUSTON: I'd like
you to smell the sea.
>>LISA: My favorite.
>>HOUSTON: I'd like you to
smell a freshly mown meadow
after the rain.
I'd like you to
smell bread baking.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: I'd like you to
smell an Italian kitchen.
>>LISA: Wow.
Spicy.
>>HOUSTON: I'd like you
to smell an orange grove.
I'd like you to
smell something that
has to do with the family
and the beautiful tenderness
between you and your family.
>>LISA: Laughter.
Giggling.
Yes.
>>HOUSTON: And smell it.
Don't worry about it.
>>LISA: Smell it.
OK.
Yeah.
Yes.
>>HOUSTON: OK, now do
you remember the senses
we've done so far?
Everybody?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: Which are?
>>LISA: I've done the smelling.
I've done the touching.
Have I tasted?
I haven't done the tasting yet.
>>HOUSTON: No, we
haven't done the tasting.
>>LISA: Feeling.
>>HOUSTON: Feeling.
OK.
There's two more.
I'd like you to taste a
melting marshmallow that
has been sort of broiled
over an open fire.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: Got that?
>>LISA: Smores, yes.
>>HOUSTON: Smores, yes.
OK.
I would like you to taste
a lovely piece of pizza
with a melting mozzarella.
>>LISA: The cheese all over it.
>>HOUSTON: The
cheese, that's right.
Pulling the stringing away.
I would like you to taste hot,
just-baked bread slathered
with butter and orange marmalade
or what other jam you really
like.
>>LISA: Strawberry.
>>HOUSTON: Strawberry, OK.
Strawberry.
OK.
I would like you to
taste ice cold lemonade.
>>LISA: Oh, on a hot day.
>>HOUSTON: On a hot day.
I would like you to taste
an angel food cake topped
with dark minted chocolate
mousse and whipped cream.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
Yep.
>>HOUSTON: And now I'd like
you to taste the wonderful meal
that you and your family in
this deep, deep, deep lucious
interconnection has.
>>LISA: Yes.
That I cooked.
Yes.
[EXHALES]
>>HOUSTON: I'd like you to
hear rain on a tin roof.
I would like you to
hear a chorus of mice
singing the Hallelujah chorus.
[LAUGHTER]
>>HOUSTON: I would like
you to hear parents
cooing to a little newborn baby.
I'd like you to hear
Martin Luther King saying
his great speech,
"I Have a Dream."
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
Yes.
Always sends chills
through my whole body.
Yes.
>>HOUSTON: I want you to hear
an ecstatic crowd at a concert.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
[EXHALING]
>>HOUSTON: I'd like
you to hear your family
in that wonderful state of
deep, deep community and empathy
and deep time together.
OK.
>>LISA: Yes.
I-- My whole body is so
completely energized.
My hands are hot.
Look, flushed.
Look.
>>HOUSTON: Absolutely.
Whoa, yes.
>>LISA: Because my
entire body is engaged.
And towards-- and when
you move your every cell
of your body towards
that goal, whatever
it is for other people, you
feel that entire-- that happens.
That absolutely happens.
>>HOUSTON: Because that's
one of the best ways
to activate these
interior images.
Now when you activate
interior images,
you will find that you can
become much more creative
because you're thinking
in images not in words.
And what happens is that the
mind can select, synthesize,
do the work of
months in minutes,
as we find in high creativity.
>>LISA: Oh, that's nice.
Yes.
Yes, you can.
You can get out of that stuck
place I was talking about
at the beginning of the show
where all the barriers are.
>>HOUSTON: That's right.
>>LISA: All right, we're
going to take a quick break
and take a deep
breath and be right
back with the
amazing Jean Houston.
We'll be right back.
Welcome back.
I'm Lisa Garr, and my
guest is Jean Houston.
We are exploring
the possible human,
which is what Jean
basically coined
this term, the possible
human, if you could.
Those two words together are
a beautiful combination--
the possible human-- when we,
at some points in our life,
lose a lot of
possibility and that
around our story of possibility.
So the story is changing for us.
With whom is it changing?
>>LISA: Well, just
about everybody.
Give me a category.
>>LISA: We were talking
earlier about women.
>>HOUSTON: Women.
All right.
So I'm in India-- this
is some years ago--
and I'm in a village,
small village,
and it has one television
set owned by an old Brahmin
lady, high caste lady.
And she has placed
it in the trees.
And people come
in from the fields
and they tie up
their water buffalo
and they come and sit down to
watch the "Ramayana," which
at this point was every Sunday
and I think 30 episodes.
It is the core story of India.
It pervades everything
in Indian life.
It's the story of Prince
Rama, the noble Prince
Rama, and his beautiful
wife, Princess Sita, and how
they are betrayed
of their kingdom
and go and spend 14 years
living in the forest.
And they have a
lovely life there.
But then she is abducted by a
ten-headed demon called Ravana
who takes her away and to
Sri Lanka, his kingdom.
And poor, distraught Rama
gathers armies, his own armies
and an army of monkeys led
by the glorious Hanuman
and others.
And they build a bridge
to Sri Lanka, and they go
and they, ultimately
after tremendous battles,
they rescue her.
Well this is one of the
most beautiful things
you have ever seen.
And great costumes and
tremendous, glorious songs.
And mighty acts.
And it's one of-- it's just
sheer poetry and glory.
And I was thinking, oh, I wish
we had something like this.
When suddenly, the old
Brahmin lady turns to me--
she's good English--
and she says to me,
oh, I don't like Princess Sita.
She is much too passive.
What?
Yes.
We women in India, we are
much stronger than that.
We have to change the story--
not make her so passive.
But madam, the story is at
least 3,000 or 4,000 years old.
That's right.
It's very old.
All the more reason
we have to change it.
We women in India,
we are strong.
We are full of purpose.
We really take
care of everything.
My name is Sita.
My husband's name is Rama, same
as there, very common in India.
He is a lazy bum.
Anything happen, I'd
have to rescue him.
We have to change the story.
Show the strength of women.
The strength of women.
Yes, indeed.
And everybody was
laughing and agreeing.
And I was so shocked.
I was watching the
changing of the story.
Instead of the--
>>LISA: Right there.
>>HOUSTON: --meak
lady, you know,
the full, strong, stalwart
partner with the men
and the whole domain
of the human agenda.
And there she was.
>>LISA: Which really
existed around her.
>>HOUSTON: Which
existed around her
and which she certainly
was a living advocate of.
>>LISA: A part of, yeah.
>>HOUSTON: Well, you know,
after this glorious, glorious
presentation, what
follows on the television
that maybe 300 million
people are watching?
"Dynasty."
Downloaded from the satellite.
I was so embarrassed.
And the lady, she says--
>>LISA: The American story.
>>HOUSTON: --why
you so embarrassed?
It is the same story.
What?
Yes, you got the good lady,
you got the bad lady, good man,
bad man, you got the
beautiful clothes.
People flying through the air.
Good versus evil.
Yes, indeed, it
is the same story.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOUSTON: And she
was absolutely right.
It was like the world
myth coming together.
>>LISA: In "Dynasty."
>>HOUSTON: Yes.
And, you know, it really showed
me that the story is changing.
When the story is
changing about women,
it is changing about everything.
>>LISA: This is true, yes.
>>HOUSTON: So it's no longer
the old hero's journey
with a 16-year-old boy battling
his own toxic problems.
It is the world.
>>LISA: Whisks
away the girl, yes.
>>HOUSTON: It's women
and men together.
It is people of all ages,
of different ethnic groups,
as we certainly see
on television today.
>>LISA: Yes, yes, yes.
>>HOUSTON: It's a world story.
>>LISA: So, then, how do
we take that large picture
and change the
story that we have
about our past--
about our experiences
that may have been traumatic?
How do we change those stories?
>>HOUSTON: One of the ways
that I work in seminars--
as well as around the world
but also seminars here--
is I take a great story,
like the "Ramayana,"
like the life of Gandhi, like--
>>LISA: The life of Christ.
>>HOUSTON: --the
quest for the Grail,
the life of Christ, the quest
for the Grail, "The Wizard
of Oz."
In fact, my next book is
called "The Wizard of Us."
>>LISA: Oh, great.
>>HOUSTON: Well, let's take "The
Wizard of Oz" as an example.
OK?
>>LISA: OK.
>>HOUSTON: And what I do is I
have people have experiences
that follow the trend, the
unfolding of the story,
but learning different
kinds of things throughout.
So, for example,
"The Wizard of Oz"
deals with Dorothy living in--
>>LISA: Kansas.
>>HOUSTON: --dustbowl Kansas
in terrible time yearning,
yearning, somewhere over
the rainbow, yearning.
You know, she's at a--
>>LISA: Skies are blue, yes.
>>HOUSTON: Yes, and
she needs to get out
of an outmoded situation.
She goes to her auntie, Auntie
Em, Auntie Em, yearning.
Oh, go away Dorothy.
Can't you see we're
counting our chickens?
You know, the American
way-- counting the chickens.
And something
awful is happening.
The naughty-- the dreadful
person, Miss Gulch,
is going to try to take
away and kill her--
>>LISA: Her dog.
Toto.
>>HOUSTON: --beloved
little dog, Toto.
Anyway, what happens?
Where are we in our
lives that we really
feel we are at the
end of one story
and we're not at the beginning,
but something in us is calling?
Something in us is saying,
you are so much more
and you can be so much more.
Clearly, you need a journey.
But often it takes a tornado
or something to shake you up.
>>LISA: Something catastrophic.
>>HOUSTON: How have
you been shaken up?
Well, it doesn't have
to be catastrophic,
but it's got to shake you up.
>>LISA: Trauma shakes you up.
>>HOUSTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: A move.
A death of a loved one.
>>HOUSTON: Whatever.
But there's always
there inevitably
in our lives something
that's going to shake us up.
Or maybe just abject boredom--
we have got to get out of here.
>>LISA: Lack of purpose, yes.
>>HOUSTON: Lack of purpose.
Same old, same old.
Living in serial
monotony, you know.
So what happens?
Of course, it is the tornado.
And in the book-- Frank Baum--
the actual house actually moves
and then it's a
dream in the movie.
But she lands in her
creative unconscious.
Remember it moves out of--
>>LISA: Yellow brick road.
>>HOUSTON: Yes, and she moves
out of the black and white
into this colorful
land where she
meets people who appreciate her.
That's important, so
I might do something
about deep appreciation
between people.
Because there's nothing
better than deep,
deep seeing appreciation of the
other than to call them forth.
And she's appreciated
by these little people.
>>LISA: So to get
out of your story?
>>HOUSTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: Or like she found
someone who needed more heart.
>>HOUSTON: That's right.
Well, we're getting
there, you see.
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
>>HOUSTON: And then
comes the archetype
of the beloved-- the
great guidance figure--
Glinda the Good Witch.
So we get in touch
with a higher self
that gives us the
higher guidance.
I call it the intelligy-- the
deep, dynamic, purposeful high
self that is ourselves as if
we'd had a thousand years to do
our own development,
our human homework.
And there she is.
And she sets her on a new
path, the yellow brick road.
The road of spiritual pollen.
Follow the yellow brick road.
Follow the-- And
who does she meet?
>>LISA: Spiritual pollen.
That's great.
>>HOUSTON: She meets
disempowered parts of herself.
She meets the
disempowered mind--
the Scarecrow-- who will
prove during their journey
to have enormous intelligence.
So that's where I
may do an exercise
to activate the
brain in new ways,
to be able to tap into the
enormous, different kinds
of resources of different
kinds of intelligence
that we all have.
>>LISA: There are so many.
>>HOUSTON: So I'll
train people in that.
Then she meets the
disempowered heart
in the Tin Man, who
actually turns out
to be the most sympathetic,
the most radically empathic.
And we develop heartful
processes and the ability
to be empathic to others
and to deeply understand,
to cross the great
divide of otherness,
to have the compassion
that sees deeply
into the heart of another as
well as into our own hearts.
And heal the heart, too.
We do a lot of healing.
And then the disempowered
courage in the Cowardly Lion
who turns out to have-- even
though he may be scared all
the time, by golly,
he takes the risks.
He takes the great leaps.
He carries them on the back.
He's scared, but by
golly, he does it.
And how to engender
courage and a passion
for the possible whereas
before you thought
you had no passion
at all, you see.
And then, of course,
ultimately, you face entropy.
You face evil.
You face the things,
the breakdown,
and yet you throw the
water of life on the--
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
In his face.
>>HOUSTON: Yes.
And it dissolves.
And you meet the great wizard
who'd been there all along,
you know, watching the journey.
And you discover
that even though he's
terrifying up there
on the screen,
the little dog pulls
aside the curtain,
don't look at that man
behind the curtain.
>>LISA: Our greatest demons are
actually small and reduced down
to--
>>HOUSTON: And it turns
out he's really not
much of a wizard
at all, but he's
a very great psychotherapist.
And he gives them what
they need, you know.
The beating heart,
the statement that you
are doctor of thinkology,
the badge that says courage.
And with her, the fact
that she had the ability
to return home all the time.
>>LISA: The whole time.
>>HOUSTON: And the shoes.
But he had offered to take
her up first of all to Kansas,
but the dog runs
after a Siamese cat.
And so she has to
find out from Glinda
that it was there all the time.
>>LISA: And that's basically
what we have in all of us.
>>HOUSTON: That's what we have.
And when she gets
home, she says,
it's in-- I realize it
was in me all the time.
>>LISA: All the time.
>>HOUSTON: And it was the
collective unconscious
of the human race
that she tunes into.
We have so much inside
of us all the time.
And what my work is
about is to help people
through these activations,
through these exercises,
to really discover that
we are the wizard, that we
are the possible human.
>>LISA: To draw that out of
us and to bring that out of us
in a way that carries
us out of a stuck place.
But what about when you
feel that that tragedy is
so concrete, so
disabling, so real?
You had the experience of
losing your husband of 42--
>>HOUSTON: 43 years.
>>LISA: --43 years.
>>HOUSTON: I was well married.
>>LISA: Well married.
>>HOUSTON: Yes.
>>LISA: And happily married.
With the wonderful ups and
downs that we all go through.
>>LISA: Of course.
That's marriage.
>>HOUSTON: That's the nature.
>>LISA: Yes, of marriage.
That's a good distinction.
But when you went
through that experience--
and this was not so long ago--
>>HOUSTON: No, it wasn't.
>>LISA: --how did you
deal with that loss?
>>HOUSTON: Well, I prepared for
it because I knew he was dying.
>>LISA: How do prepare
for something--
>>HOUSTON: I knew he was dying.
>>LISA: But we all
know that eventually--
>>HOUSTON: So what I did
is I sat down with him,
and I interviewed him
while he lay in bed.
And I interviewed
him on his life.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>HOUSTON: Yes.
And incidents and things
that-- so that we were together
in the remembrance and
the harvest of his life.
And that was a beautiful-- we
did this for several months
before he died.
>>LISA: As he was--
>>HOUSTON: And that
was very important
so that we had these deep
times of mutual remembrance.
>>LISA: At any time though,
although you knew he was sick,
at any time during that
experience did you think
I can make him live, I can do
this, we can do this together.
Did you have--
>>HOUSTON: Well, we
did a lot together.
But it's became clear
in the last year
that he-- because he had
congestive heart failure.
But it was very delicate,
tender, and very beautiful
time.
So the very fact that
we completed together--
do you see it wasn't sudden,
we completed together.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>HOUSTON: It's much more
difficult when it is sudden.
>>LISA: That's true.
So you completed together
while he was still alive.
>>HOUSTON: Yes.
>>LISA: And then,
yet, after he was gone
and his body did
leave this planet,
do you feel that there's a hole
that still needs filling there?
Or is it that completion?
Did it carry over?
>>HOUSTON: Well,
you know what I did?
He was cremated.
And I knew he was very
close to ancient Egypt.
And a month or two after
he died, I went to Egypt.
And I put his ashes between
the paws of the Sphinx--
>>LISA: Oh, you did?
>>HOUSTON: --and
also on the walls
of an archetype of the Sekhmet
that he was greatly attached to
and things like that.
And so I carried him forth
into the next places,
you see, and had a
sense of his-- well,
I happen to believe
in continuity.
>>LISA: Yes, I was going to
say, do you still communicate?
>>HOUSTON: I don't.
It's as if he's moved
on to something else.
And I'm not
necessarily to give in
to that kind of--
though people around me
did have a sense of that.
>>LISA: Yes, but you feel more
complete about the entire--
>>HOUSTON: Oh, yes.
Oh, yes.
>>LISA: You do.
>>HOUSTON: Yes, I do.
>>LISA: I see that.
>>HOUSTON: But I was
married for 43 years,
and he was dying
for a year, you see.
So there was that.
>>LISA: But that's
hardly an excuse.
People are in the situation
of being married for so--
>>HOUSTON: People-- yes.
And they feel the hole.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: But we were
filling the hole already.
>>LISA: The whole time.
>>HOUSTON: You know there are
many cultures that do this.
They prepare for the dying.
They prepare for it.
And so by interviewing
him and being
able to re-live
that life together,
that we came to the natural
ending and the opening
to the next stage.
And we both happen
to believe that there
was that deep continuity
of one kind or another.
>>LISA: Amazing.
You really do embody the
power of the possible human.
>>HOUSTON: Well, I
struggle at it, you know.
I keep knocking on the
door of the possibility.
>>LISA: Well, I like that
you say that as well.
I know that it's-- but
you're humble about it.
But look what you did
in that experience.
You embodied the possibilities
that yet our entire culture
and society has formed
our opinions around death
being a final,
devastating experience.
And you preempted it with
something that was filled.
>>HOUSTON: Well, there
was also something else
that I did that I've never
spoken about publicly.
He was up at one of
the major birthdays
just a year or two before--
it was several years
before he died.
Major birthday a few
years before he died.
And I knew it was very important
for him-- this birthday.
So I said, who would you
like at your birthday?
And he named all these
people that he admired.
Margaret Mead.
Joseph Campbell.
A man-- a great psychophysical
master-- Feldenkrais.
Anyway, there were about
a-- oh, Jean Possault.
Simone de Voiver-- because he
had studied with him in Paris
when he was a very young man.
He said, that's who I'd
like at my birthday.
OK.
And I didn't tell him
what I was going to do,
but I got big blow-up
pictures of each one.
>>LISA: Oh, great.
>>HOUSTON: And we had a big
table that I put them around.
And I got little CDs
of their speaking.
And I put-- I borrowed
everybody's CD--
>>LISA: What a great idea.
>>HOUSTON: And I got
them all so they were all
talking simultaneously.
And then-- Bob
didn't know what was
going on-- I brought
him into his birthday.
And there were all the people
that he had wanted to have.
>>LISA: Oh my God.
>>HOUSTON: All of
them were dead,
but there they were alive.
And they were all
talking simultaneously.
It was a great birthday.
>>LISA: What a great idea.
>>HOUSTON: It was great.
>>LISA: Those are the types
of nuggets that you remember,
rather than his passing and the
whole years-- You experienced
that-- that full
living, that passion.
When I spoke earlier about the
idea of living with that peace,
with passion, to living--
>>HOUSTON: Peace.
>>LISA: --to thrive, living to
a place where we're experiencing
fullness as human beings.
There's a clip that I actually
want to share with you of Jean
speaking at one of her events.
And this is the energy
that she lives and embodies
and brings to people
when she speaks.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-You know, we are a very
fortunate group of people.
We really are.
Because we have an
extraordinary reason
for being on earth
in this, the most
important time in human history.
Other times thought they
were it, they're wrong.
This is it.
The early years of
the new millennium.
Our job, our holy task,
our great privilege
is to help to bring about peace.
Peace that is so rich, so
full of flavor, that it makes
sense to make peace to shift
the dangerous and fearful
war-embracing
patterns of century
to offer a rich and
evocative alternative.
Yes?
-Yes.
-Many years ago I was on a
late-night program-- you know,
1, 2 o'clock.
And I don't know
if some of you are
going to be pushing your
books at 1 and 2 o'clock
in the morning, but I
tell you what happens
is after a while
you fall asleep.
And your mouth keeps
on going, and you're
sort of stunned at what you
have found yourself saying.
And what I found
myself saying was
that many of the images, the
concepts of peace that most
of us grew up with
is simply too tame.
Peace should be alluring.
It should be fascinating.
It should be challenging.
In a word, I said,
peace should be sexy.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Peace should be sexy.
>>HOUSTON: Yes.
>>LISA: Tell me about
peace being sexy.
>>HOUSTON: Well,
it should be sexy.
Don't let the war
boys hog it all.
The spit, the spice
and the glamour.
>>LISA: The glamour.
>>HOUSTON: Peace is
your-- mmmm-- your hands
kneading dough.
Peace is the walk in the park.
Peace is little June-- little
ladybugs on white campions.
Peace is the lovers.
Peace are the ones
who are like Dorothy
in that state of yearning.
Peace is adolescence-busting.
Peace is great poems.
Peace is not insipid, dry--
>>LISA: Marches and--
>>HOUSTON: Peace is sexy.
And that's why we need much
more visceral, vital, sumptuous
notions of peace, not an
insipid dove-- you know,
nice as that is.
>>LISA: But what
about the activist?
What about the marches?
What about the 99%?
Is that also what
you're talking about?
>>HOUSTON: Yes, it
is taking action.
It's being there.
But it's being there not
just being against something.
It's what you're for.
It's being in the grand design.
It's being, as I said, hands-on,
sensory-rich, doing something
about it.
And a protest is one part,
but beyond the protest
is the doing.
During this whole-- the Occupy
Movement that is going on,
I was on the phone
often very early
for different
parts of the world.
People were calling
me up and said,
Jean, help us to start to design
the strategy-- what we're for.
So I would do all kinds
of exercises with people--
clumps and groups of people--
to design strategies to deepen
into that great creative process
that's going on all the time
beneath the surface crust of
consciousness and to come out
with juicy, feasible, doable,
passionate ideas of things that
they could do in their
communities to make a--
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
>>HOUSTON: --more vibrant,
peaceful community.
>>LISA: So, for
example, peace has
to start from
within before it can
be given an example
outside-- before anything
can happen outside of our home.
>>HOUSTON: Well, if
you start within it's
much more likely to be possible
and passionate and doable
without.
Instead of just
saying, let's go!
>>LISA: Let's march, please.
What types of things
would you tell
people to do in
their communities?
>>HOUSTON: Well, for example,
they would talk to me.
And different communities
had different issues.
And they might have
issues around--
>>LISA: Violence or--
>>HOUSTON: Well,
not so much violence
but things going missing.
The bookstores
closing down, you see.
>>LISA: Oh, yes, yes, yes.
>>HOUSTON: Centers for children
to come to after school
to get back into arts and music.
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOUSTON: Places for people
to envision and dream.
New ideas for the community.
What could it look like?
Because when you have a
passionate inner vision,
when you have the inner
architecture of what
a community or a family
or a culture can be,
then things start to move.
But without the ideas,
things don't tend to happen.
>>LISA: Right.
And so the community
centers and those types
of things that
reinstated the culture
was what you brought--
what you taught.
>>HOUSTON: Yes,
among other things.
>>LISA: There's an idea
that you have around
teaching how to bring about
a person's possibility.
If you are one of those
people that likes steps
and how to do things, Jean
teaches about opening yourself
to limitless possibilities.
And this is a three-step
process that we kind of
condensed into three steps.
But the first of that
is thinking in images.
We've been doing a
lot of that today.
>>HOUSTON: Well, part of
it yes, that's one of them.
Thinking in images.
Making use of the fact that
you are not just a simple ego.
Ego is but one image among the
multiple images of the psyche.
You have many people in you.
For example, if I say who am I?
I'm a teacher.
I'm a writer.
I'm a dog person, big time.
>>LISA: You're a dog lover, yes.
>>HOUSTON: Sometimes
I'm a gardener.
I'm a traveler, God knows.
I'm a healer, a meditator.
I'm a fool.
I'm a clown, you know.
I have been an athlete in
earlier parts of my life.
I love to dance.
I have all these
different parts of me.
Now if I were to
say to you, just
name a stream of consciousness
some of your parts--
both known and also perhaps not
even-- maybe even further down.
Name some.
>>LISA: I am a mother.
I am a friend.
I am a mountain biker.
I am an orator.
I am a nature lover.
I am a healer.
I am an energy shifter.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
Good.
That's very good.
Go on.
The wild cards-- bring them up.
>>LISA: Yes.
I am all about the
power of possibilities.
I am a forward thinker.
I am all about moving
into the future.
I am a possible seeker,
and I am a positive person.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
>>LISA: Intentionally.
>>HOUSTON: Now you
see, how do you then
begin to develop two,
three, four, five,
or more of these
different persona
to bring them stage front?
I'll give it from
my own example.
I dislike writing intensely.
>>LISA: Really?
>>HOUSTON: And I'm
phobic for writing.
And I have my 27th--
>>LISA: 26th-- 27th book.
>>HOUSTON: Well,
27th is coming up.
And yet-- and I
have 130,000 pages
unpublished because
my mystery school
I had to write a small
book every month.
And by the time it was
delivered in three days,
it was 400 pages.
And this went on
for almost 29 years.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
Now what do I do?
Because I sit down and if Jean
stares at the computer-- blank.
>>LISA: It's not
going to happen.
>>HOUSTON: I happen to
be a very good cook.
>>LISA: OK.
Something I didn't realize.
>>HOUSTON: The reason
I'm a very good cook,
and I'm a serious cook,
is because-- remember
I talked about my
parents getting divorced.
Well, earlier when I was
noticing the problems between
them, my mother-- whose name
was Maria Donciatta Seraphina
Perpetua you know,
the Gratziella,--
she was born in
Siracusa, Sicily,
and she marries Jack
Houston of Texas.
They hated each other's food.
>>LISA: I can imagine.
>>HOUSTON: My father
could not abide
the smell or look of garlic.
He would say, Mary, those
things, those are stinkbugs.
That's what the old witch
ladies down in Texas
you know they hang
around their neck
to fight off the run-at-yous.
No.
>>LISA: Where's the
meat and potatoes?
>>HOUSTON: We don't
eat those things.
Worse than that with
hush puppies and--
>>LISA: Southern fried chicken.
>>HOUSTON: That's right.
And so what I did to try
to keep them together
is I became the
world's first fusion
cook around eight or nine.
And I would make things
like chicken-fried polenta
to try to get them-- Anyway,
I became a fusion cook.
And I stayed, and I
became the family cook.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>HOUSTON: And I remain that.
So that I even had
relatives who would
come to dinner who had
no idea what else I did.
They would say, hey, Jean--
especially the Sicilian-- eh,
she's a cook.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah?
>>HOUSTON: And
they once went to--
>>LISA: You're a cook.
>>HOUSTON: --hear me
give a big speech,
and everybody got
excited by this.
Hey, Jean, now we thought all
these years all you could do
was cook, you know,
and you talk good.
Anyway.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: Right.
>>HOUSTON: So as a
cook, I am not blocked.
So when I have to write,
I take on the cook
or one of the other different
persona that works for me--
>>LISA: Archetypes.
>>HOUSTON: --and I find that
I don't have the blocks.
And I stir in the ideas,
and I add the seasonings
of different associations.
And the words begin
to come together.
And as a cook, I am cooking.
>>LISA: See, I love how
you tie these things in.
Like how you did earlier
with the visualization,
you tied that into my goal.
>>HOUSTON: So, for
example, if I were to say,
of these different
persona-- known
and also, maybe, latent--
choose one for me right now.
>>LISA: The forward thinker.
>>HOUSTON: The forward thinker.
OK.
Now as a forward thinker,
you are entirely now
the forward thinker.
Normally, I would
put on music for you.
You would dance it.
You would become
the forward thinker.
You would walk and act and emote
and be the forward thinker.
Yes?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>HOUSTON: And
that's happening now?
>>LISA: Yes, I'm
a huge visualizer.
>>HOUSTON: OK.
And then visualizer,
forward thinker,
put yourself in that
family situation
two or three months from now.
But entirely not as Lisa
who you know, the ego of you
Lisa, but as forward thinker.
Take her and see what happens.
Now.
>>LISA: Take that
to the jump time.
Take that.
That's the jump.
>>HOUSTON: Be that, and
be her doing that work
with your family.
>>LISA: And that is--
pretty much I do that a lot.
When I set a goal, I
go to that-- the end.
Aren't these many,
many lost modes
of prayer where this has been
practiced in ancient cultures?
>>HOUSTON: Absolutely.
And still are in indigenous
and native cultures.
>>LISA: And so it has
since been lost in ours,
but it's going to that acting
as if it has already happened
and being in that
place of the cornstalks
raising up to the armpits in
the deep mud of the rain that
has fallen in the
middle of a drought.
And that's where
that feeling comes--
>>HOUSTON: Very good.
>>LISA: --from.
Yes.
That's where I love to
live is in that place
of possibilities-- no matter
what situation I'm in.
>>HOUSTON: Now look what
just has happened with you.
Your descriptions have changed.
Your descriptors have changed.
They are rich.
They are full.
>>LISA: Colorful.
Yes.
>>HOUSTON:They're bu--
And you can feel them.
You can touch them.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
>>HOUSTON: Because
you've already been--
you just shifted your persona.
>>LISA: You're right.
And to live in
that place is what
the possible human is, right?
To live in that
energy constantly.
Filled with--
>>HOUSTON: Well, not constantly
because you get tired out,
but when you need it.
You can pull upon all
these different persona.
And as you develop them,
then their skillful means,
their skillful capacities,
can be utilized for anything
that you wanted.
>>LISA: If you'd like to find
out more about Jean Houston
and her incredible
body of work, go
to jeanhouston.com You can
find out about her mystery
schools and her books
and all the things
that she has about the
power of the possible human.
And if you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Jean Houston or share
it with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com
and you can watch
a lot more thought-provoking
interviews there as well.
Sign up for your free
trial at gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]